README.md, before:

# containers

This course is part of a presentation series "Without Any Gaps" at the Mohn Medical Imaging and Visualization Center that provides introductory presentations on technical solutions supporting open science.

## Motivation

First some words about a related topic "cloud computing" or "virtual machines". Right after this introduction we explain what makes containerization so interesting.

Most cloud computing is done using "virtual machines", which are simulated computers that run on other people's hardware (a definition of a cloud). Such a virtual machine provide secure computing resources and is hosted on large physical computers. One such large computer can host hundereds of virtual machines securely as each VM is separated from its neighbors with its own portion of the CPU, memory and storage. Changing such a setup by adding or removing VM's is easy as only software changes are required on the large computer, which makes this concept cost effective as projects can share compute resources.

One downside of virtual machines is that they have to simulate a full physical computer. Starting a virtual machine therefore requires it to 'boot-up'. The system is more complex as the software needs to simulate all physical aspects of the computer for the boot process to work, this includes the graphic card, sound, storage, and network systems. Such components are already provided by the server that runs the virtual machine - the idea to re-use those components from the server, instead of simulating them was the starting point for container services.

By separating containers from the the host and from each other and by removing the need to boot-up container can be provid security and are better scalable
compared to virtual machines. They provide a much faster and cheaper solution compared to standard virtualization. Whereas a virtual machine might need 10 seconds to boot-up a container is ready in milliseconds. Here are the basic similarities and differences of virtual machines and containers:

- Startup time: for a container its measured in milliseconds, virtual machines needs seconds and sometimes minutes
- Execution time: similar executation times with some overhead compared to native running applications (maybe 5% slower compared to native applications)
- Access to data: virtual machines need to connect to external storage using a shared file system, containers can do the same but can also 'mount' local directories - with some speed penalties if the container host is not Linux
- Use-case: virtual machines are used to replace physical machines, container services are used to replace programs

Especially the last part is of interest in understanding why containers are so useful. As a container starts up very fast it can be used like a program. Most containers are started and are automatically removed after they finish. They only have an effect on the data they process. A container might therefore run only for a second based on the computation it performs. Containers can of course also run forever and react to incoming data, process them and send back the results.


## How to start

It is easiest to start using containers on MacOS, Windows or Linux with the 'docker' runtime (https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/). Your computer becomes the docker-host that will run your containers. It is possible to share and run a container on all three platforms so the choice of what system to use for development is not too important. Here a first test of an ubuntu container providing us with the current date.

```bash
> docker run --rm ubuntu date

Mon Sep 13 13:46:50 UTC 2021
```

On a MacOS host the above call of starting a container and running the 'date' program and removing it again took 1.4seconds (on a Linux host the same call took about 0.5seconds).

Commit message:

docker on windows linux and macos

README.md, after:

# containers

This course is part of a presentation series "Without Any Gaps" at the Mohn Medical Imaging and Visualization Center that provides introductory presentations on technical solutions supporting open science.

## Motivation

First some words about a related topic "cloud computing" or "virtual machines". Right after this introduction we explain what makes containerization so interesting.

Most cloud computing is done using "virtual machines", which are simulated computers that run on other people's hardware (a definition of a cloud). Such a virtual machine provide secure computing resources and is hosted on large physical computers. One such large computer can host hundereds of virtual machines securely as each VM is separated from its neighbors with its own portion of the CPU, memory and storage. Changing such a setup by adding or removing VM's is easy as only software changes are required on the large computer, which makes this concept cost effective as projects can share compute resources.

One downside of virtual machines is that they have to simulate a full physical computer. Starting a virtual machine therefore requires it to 'boot-up'. The system is more complex as the software needs to simulate all physical aspects of the computer for the boot process to work, this includes the graphic card, sound, storage, and network systems. Such components are already provided by the server that runs the virtual machine - the idea to re-use those components from the server, instead of simulating them was the starting point for container services.

By separating containers from the the host and from each other and by removing the need to boot-up container can be provid security and are better scalable
compared to virtual machines. They provide a much faster and cheaper solution compared to standard virtualization. Whereas a virtual machine might need 10 seconds to boot-up a container is ready in milliseconds. Here are the basic similarities and differences of virtual machines and containers:

- Startup time: for a container its measured in milliseconds, virtual machines needs seconds and sometimes minutes
- Execution time: similar executation times with some overhead compared to native running applications (maybe 5% slower compared to native applications)
- Access to data: virtual machines need to connect to external storage using a shared file system, containers can do the same but can also 'mount' local directories - with some speed penalties if the container host is not Linux
- Use-case: virtual machines are used to replace physical machines, container services are used to replace programs

Especially the last part is of interest in understanding why containers are so useful. As a container starts up very fast it can be used like a program. Most containers are started and are automatically removed after they finish. They only have an effect on the data they process. A container might therefore run only for a second based on the computation it performs. Containers can of course also run forever and react to incoming data, process them and send back the results. Such setups are more involved as containers do not come prepared with system services like 'cron' and 'systemd'.


## How to start

It is easiest to start using containers on MacOS, Windows or Linux with the 'docker' runtime (https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/). Your computer becomes the docker-host that will run your containers. It is possible to share and run a container on all three platforms so the choice of what system to use for development is not too important. Here a first test of an ubuntu container providing us with the current date.

```bash
> docker run --rm ubuntu date

Mon Sep 13 13:46:50 UTC 2021
```

On a MacOS host the above call of running a docker container and the 'date' program and removing it again took 1.4seconds (on a Linux host the same call took about 0.5seconds).

## Some background

Running a container on a linux system is probably the easiest to explain. Linux comes with security measures like control groups (cgroups) that allocate resources from the host computer like CPU, memory and networking and provide them to programs. Programs that are running in an environment provided by cgroups (and namespaces) are separated from the host system. To these programs other resources do not exist. Containers use this to to provide a minimal Linux inside the container with no access to host users or host storage.

On MacOS and Windows the process is a little bit more complex. Containers are linux based so in order to provide the 'docker run' command from above the docker environment simulates a Linux computer using a virtual machine. This is done fully transparent to the user but all commands go through this additional virtualization layer. One of the side-effects of this tunneling is that container can only access the storage that the virtualization solution provides - usually much less compared to the storage on the host system. You might therefore run into problems of 'not-enough-memory'. In such cases 'docker' needs to extend its space reserved for containers, which is done in the docker dashbord.
